[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi.
I'm Lisa Garr, host of
Gaiam "Inspirations."
This story of how one
woman can make a difference
is inspirational and
also really shows
how you could live-- truly
live-- a life of purpose.
Akuyoe Graham is joining me.
She has committed herself to
teaching incarcerated youth who
feel unheard and
unworthy to have
a life of purpose and dignity.
And she had done this
through her foundation
called Spirit Awakening.
Basically, through one
child at a time, Akuyoe
teaches these children
creative writing, meditation,
using the spoken word
to express and help
build character, and
ultimately build self-esteem.
You have an amazing program.
Thank you so much
for being here.
>>AKUYOE GRAHAM:
Oh, Lisa, thank you
very much for having
me on your show.
I love you, Lisa, so--
>>LISA: Oh, my gosh.
The love is mutual.
>>GRAHAM: I really
just honor you
and the work you
do in the world.
And I've learned so much from
listening to you on the radio.
You have a beautiful voice.
And just, your presence
really speaks so loud.
And it's inspired me.
So thank you.
>>LISA: Wow.
To know that what we talk
about here has inspired you
and these children makes it
just so beautifully worth it.
>>GRAHAM: Absolutely.
Many times, I take you to the
juvenile facilities with me.
You're there in
my heart or I hear
something that inspires me.
And sometimes it'll just inspire
an entire topic or lesson plan
and I go with it.
>>LISA: I love that.
That is beautiful.
So how did you get
started in all of this?
I mean, take me way
back-- way back.
You grew up in--
>>GRAHAM: OK.
I was born in
Ghana, West Africa.
And I grew up in both
England-- London-- and then
New York and then Los Angeles.
And when I first moved to Los
Angeles-- I'm a trained actor.
I love acting.
I love writing.
I moved here and I was
working pretty well.
I was making
commercials, TV films.
So I've done some things.
And I remember-- this is
a true story-- one day,
coming home after a shoot
on a made for TV film.
And I wasn't a licensed
spiritual practitioner
at the time, but I
just got on my knees
in my home-- in my
apartment in Hollywood.
And I said, God, so is this it?
I'm just going to become
famous and make money?
Really?
Please.
You've got to give
me a little bit more.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>GRAHAM: They say be
careful what you ask for.
But I think what I
was really saying
was that I needed to go deeper.
I mean, it's great.
We're in award season right now.
There's lots of amazing films.
And you can see--
certainly, growing up,
it was films that I
saw that inspired me.
So there was a reason
why I wanted to do that--
and plays that inspired me.
And I know that not
all of them do that.
So I wanted something
that would really
allow me to use all of me--
all of my talents and gifts--
unabridged, unfettered,
where I wouldn't
have to be small in any way.
And so once I
uttered that prayer,
almost immediately, I
was offered a position
with L.A. Theater Works to
go to the juvenile system.
And simultaneously, I began
writing my one woman play.
So everything just started
happening all at once.
I was teaching poetry to
incarcerated juveniles that
were in the special handling
unit, which means that these
were children that had committed
pretty serious crimes that
would be going away
for a very long time.
I'd never done that
kind of work before.
I did not know that
I could even do it.
But I remember going in for
the job interview, Lisa,
and I sat up-- and then I
didn't have a computer, even.
I took pen to paper.
And something just came through.
And I remember reading
it thinking, holy Moses,
can I teach this?
I was quoting things from
scripture, from Shakespeare--
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness.
>>GRAHAM: Yeah.
It was a really--
>>LISA: Just really
coming through you.
>>GRAHAM: It really
came through.
>>LISA: That's when
you know it's divine--
>>GRAHAM: Yeah.
>>LISA: Because you don't
have a reference for it.
>>GRAHAM: No.
>>LISA: So now when you said
you moved from Ghana to London,
what was the reason
for the move,
or what did your parents do?
>>GRAHAM: My parents
were divorced.
And my mother, who is
one of my biggest heroes,
wanted to see the world.
And she said to me--
she wanted to make sure
that I saw the world.
She wanted to make sure that
I knew that the world belong
to me-- that no matter what--
she said she wanted to make
sure that she could teach
me that yes, I'm a woman;
yes, I'm a woman of color
and I'm from Africa.
She said, all that
just does not matter.
And what's interesting
about that, Lisa,
is that she could teach me
that even though she was going
through her own struggles in
terms of finding her voice
and being who she is.
And yet she was
very clear that that
was what she had to teach me.
Isn't that amazing?
>>LISA: Wow.
>>GRAHAM: Yeah.
>>LISA: So she was
going through that
and teaching you
how what she needed
to learn at the same time?
>>GRAHAM: That's right.
At the same time.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>GRAHAM: Yeah.
>>LISA: Now, I mean, you went--
and you explain in this clip
that we're about to watch here--
of it not being comfortable
for you--
>>GRAHAM: No.
>>LISA: Of going to
London from Africa.
>>GRAHAM: At the
time, my mother-- here
she is, a divorcee-- a
single woman-- with me
and we're from Africa.
And back then, we hadn't evolved
as much as we all have now,
in terms of the human race.
And so England was a very
difficult transition for me.
I cannot lie about that.
It was just the level of
discrimination and prejudice
and for so many reasons.
And I just remember that I
saw things in black and white.
The snow was white.
It was cold.
And suddenly we wearing
coats and jackets
and all these things.
And everything seemed to just
point to me going inward.
And I just felt like
I was shrinking.
So that was my experience.
And then when I came
to the United States,
I felt like I began to
open myself back up again.
>>LISA: Ah.
Interesting.
We're going to take a
look at this clip here.
This is Akuyoe doing an amazing
reenactment of her one woman
show at a TED talk.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-Well, the same thing happened
to me when I got in a plane.
When it was my turn to
join my mother England,
I was sent on a plane.
On the ground, I
was amongst millions
who looked just like me.
But as the plane rose
higher and higher,
I got smaller and
smaller, just like what
I'd seen looking up from the
earth, so that by the time
I landed at Heathrow
Airport, I'd
shrunk so small that I'd
become a mere spec of pepper
in a sea of salt.
[LAUGHTER]
[SINGING] Lavender's
blue, dilly, dilly.
Lavender's green.
When I am king, dilly,
dilly, you'll be my queen.
In school, no one sang that
song to me because I was African
and they couldn't see
that I was a princess
and could one day be queen.
[LAUGHTER] In Ghana,
I wasn't colored.
Everyone was the same as me.
And the only thing
that was unusual
was if someone
was without color.
[LAUGHTER]
In this new world, living
space was boxed and sold
into little compartments
called flats.
No more cooking under the stars.
The sun and the moon were now
strangers to us, locked out
by keys, and bars, and
doors, and windows.
Earth and her daughter trees
leafed in places called parks;
animals barricaded in zoos;
human beings in apartments;
everybody in their place.
Visitation at
certain hours only,
and don't dare visit
someone without first
calling to make an appointment.
[LAUGHTER]
[APPLAUSE]
No more skipping
barefoot on Mother Earth.
Shoes and boots were necessary
for the march, march on cement.
No.
No, mama, please don't make
me go out there to play.
They look at me funny and
they make fun of my name.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
Akuyoe, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
Well, they call me Charlotte
and they call me a golliwog.
They say golliwog to me.
I'm not a golliwog am I, mama?
[CRYING]
Ah, [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH],
my darling, don't cry.
If they call you
something, then you
have to call them
something back.
You have to be strong.
Properly, look at me.
I'm number one at Pitman's
Secretarial School, eh?
Pah, pah, who loves you, eh?
Mama loves you.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] [SINGING]
At home, with mama, we could
speak in our real voices.
In London's gray, miserable
world, no one could hear me.
But finally, I had
to go out there.
I had to go to school.
And all the books I read were
full of these colorless people.
[LAUGHTER] I remember walking
through the snow school
and clinging to the
railings because I
was terrified of
falling on the ice.
I arrived at the school
and was met by Miss Coat.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: You have incredible
talent as an actress.
I mean, you really
do, to have all
of that going on in your mind.
That one moment
where you look up
and you say mama--
that was beautiful.
Were you trained as an actor?
>>GRAHAM: Yes.
I've had some of the
best acting teachers.
Back in the day, I
trained with a gentleman
named Sanford Meisner--
Herbert Berghof, Uta Hagen.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>GRAHAM: Yeah, these
are some of the greats.
>>LISA: Wow.
You were trained
by these people?
>>GRAHAM: I was
trained by them, Lisa.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>GRAHAM: Yeah.
So I do not take it for granted.
They trained me well.
And I knew I was in
the company of masters.
And what I loved was
that all of them,
especially Sandy-- we called him
Sandy-- he would always drive
home to us-- he said, look,
it takes at least 27 years
to become a really great actor.
So he said, live your life.
Don't not live your life.
And of course, work if
there's work for you to do.
But just know that with
acting, as you live
and you have these
rich experiences,
that's what you're going
to bring to your roles
and to your characters.
So the unfortunate
thing about Hollywood
is that it tells
us the opposite.
As we age or mature,
whether you're
a woman or man-- whatever--
it tells us well,
the roles are going to diminish.
And yet it's like,
wait a minute,
but this is the good stuff.
>>LISA: I'm hitting my stride.
>>GRAHAM: Yes.
This is where the juice is.
>>LISA: Yes.
I mean, I know a little bit
about the Meisner method
about bouncing and
impulses, right?
>>GRAHAM: Yes.
>>LISA: And answering
and listening.
>>GRAHAM: That's right.
And being improvisational
so that it doesn't become
stuck and old, but
each moment is fresh
because you keep it
improvisational by listening
and then responding
in the moment.
>>LISA: So you had a teacher
tell you that this wasn't it--
this wasn't all there was.
>>GRAHAM: That's right.
Yeah.
>>LISA: So then when you
got to the place of, OK,
I have a certain amount of
jobs, working as an actor--
but you knew there was more?
>>GRAHAM: That's right.
I knew there was more.
I knew there was
more in me to give.
I think that's what it was.
And I wanted to make sure that
when I'd run out of my time
here, now, that I had
given all my gifts.
I didn't want to be finished
with this run-- this race--
this particular incarnation--
and not have given
the gifts that
are in me to give.
So that was very
important to me.
I may not I have been able
to articulate it in that way.
And yet there was a
urging inside of me
that I had to listen to, that
said, hey, wait a minute.
You're capable of more than
this and you better get to it.
>>LISA: So you found the
incarcerated youth program
through one of the--
>>GRAHAM: L.A.
Theater Works, yes.
And then I began working
with them that way.
>>LISA: How?
How?
>>GRAHAM: Poetry, first.
Poetry was my inroads to them.
So it was poetry.
It was Shakespeare.
It was literature.
I love language.
I love performance and writing.
>>LISA: How was that
received in the beginning?
I mean, how did
you bridge the gap?
>>GRAHAM: Well, I
think when I go in,
what I like to do is
give them an invitation.
So when I'm in a classroom
with some children-- and they
are children.
It's hard to remember
that sometimes,
especially if you look
at their rap sheets.
I never look at the rap sheets.
And I tell them that, look,
you have judges and lawyers
and everyone else that's taking
care of that part of your life.
I'm here to take care of
the other part of your life.
Let's look to that
place within you
that is greater than
your circumstances--
greater than your situation.
That is within you.
It's in all of us.
So let's go to that.
And so they know
immediately that that's
what I'm concerned with.
So I'm not someone who's
coming to judge them.
And it has to be authentic.
The first level
of the program is
called "Unmasking
Your Authentic Voice."
And so I have a series of
contemplative questions
that I ask them to contemplate
and then to respond.
So I choose my
language very carefully
because I want them to really be
inspired by the language that's
chosen in our time together.
So when I started--
I have to tell you,
Lisa, the children
responded immediately.
If they hadn't, I wouldn't
still be doing it,
because it's too hard.
Because some of them
are really angry.
Some of them-- they
don't have manners, some.
And so you walk in and they
give you the finger or whatever.
So I thought, if this isn't
going to work-- it's too hard;
it's too difficult-- why
would I want to do it?
But immediately, from day one,
it was like a love affair.
>>LISA: Yeah.
You commanded that
presence and you
were unwavering with
who you were being.
>>GRAHAM: That's right.
>>LISA: When you go
through these programs,
you mentioned that
many of these children
are in for a life sentence.
And that starts in
their preteen years,
which I don't understand.
How do you incarcerate a child
at nine years old, for life?
>>GRAHAM: Oh, Lisa,
it's horrific.
Just recently, I had two girls
at the Los Padrinos Juvenile
Hall here in
southern California.
That's in Downey.
And I was working
the special handling
unit for the
girls-- girl's shoe.
And two of my girls were
going away for a long time.
I met them at the
age of 14-- 13, 14.
They were incarcerated.
And so I was with them
throughout their whole trials.
Even though I didn't
go to trial with them,
I would go meet them in
the classroom the next day
or whatever.
So I've known these girls
for four years or so.
And watching them get taken
away into adult system,
oh, it's really--
it's heartbreaking.
>>LISA: I was going to
ask you, what happens?
Because things change
from week to week.
>>GRAHAM: Yeah, it does.
And sometimes I just can't
even go into the room
when I know this
is their last day
or tomorrow's their last day.
And I'll just say,
you know what?
Can we say so long now?
Because it's going to be
hard for me, as well, to say
goodbye to you because I
know what's coming to you.
>>LISA: But you have that
time and that moment with them
to make a difference.
>>GRAHAM: Absolutely.
>>LISA: Talk about
living in the moment?
>>GRAHAM: Right?
And what I say to them--
because sometimes, especially
with the boys-- even some of
the girls will challenge me
and they'll say, why
should I do this work?
Miss Akuyoe, I'm going
away for 30 years.
So what the hell?
Can I say that?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>GRAHAM: What is this
program going to do for me?
And I'll say to
them well, I just
know that you have
nothing to lose.
So I'm inviting you to try it.
I'm inviting you to
keep an open mind.
I'm inviting you
to have the courage
to go on this journey
of self-discovery
and see if you can't discover
more about yourself than you
think you know.
Are you willing to
put aside all that you
think you know about
yourself and really
just allow yourself
to be an open page
and let's see what
else is there?
We know what you think you
know up to this moment,
but let's see what
else is there.
What can you discover?
What's strengths are
in you that will then
help you navigate your way
through this next 30 years
or how many ever years
you may be incarcerated.
And when you approach
it that way, again,
what do you have to lose?
>>LISA: So it doesn't
have to be a life
sentence-- an end
of life sentence?
>>GRAHAM: No.
>>LISA: This is your life now.
>>GRAHAM: That's right.
>>LISA: So make
the best of this.
>>GRAHAM: Absolutely.
>>LISA: And in
turn, these programs
could be what they live for.
>>GRAHAM: Exactly.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>GRAHAM: I have kids
writing to me saying,
give me some more
writing problems.
Give me something
to contemplate.
I need some more-- I want to
keep working on my inner life.
So send me books and
ask me questions.
And I'm writing
because this is what
will keep them alive
while they're there.
>>LISA: OK.
You go through the
creative writing process.
How do you start
with that process?
>>GRAHAM: With that
process-- in fact today,
just before coming here, I was
teaching at the girls camp.
There's two girls facilities in
Santa Clarita just for girls.
So my day one is
all about the who
am I-- what I call
the Who Am I exercise.
We start with a few
moments of meditation.
And actually, the
very, very start
of the program,
what I put to them
is, what if this were a country?
We have the opportunity
to create a country--
a different country
right now this classroom.
What should be our guidelines?
I said, what qualities do
you need to feel safe enough
to be successful in
your life-- to transcend
and overcome and transform
some of your difficulties?
What do you need?
And then I'll share with them
that what I need is respect.
I said, when I come in, I need
you to really bring respect
into this classroom.
So therefore, since
that's what I require,
I'm willing to show up with it.
I will respect each and
every single one of you.
When you speak, I'm willing
to listen-- not just shut up
so you can finish talking,
but really listen to you.
So we'll go around the room and
everyone will give a quality.
And then we create
a contract that they
have to sign so that
whenever we're together,
the commitment is
that we're going
to create a safe environment
where we can each really
be our very best.
Because what I've
discovered, Lisa,
is that success is also
a matter of safety.
Because when you're
successful, you stand out.
You are seen.
You're visible.
So you have to feel safe
enough to be visible
and you have to be strong enough
to know that in your success,
it doesn't matter if people
like you or they don't like you.
It'll happen.
So it's a matter of safety.
And for these
children, they have
to feel safe enough to know
that they can articulate
their intelligence and wisdom
without being made fun of.
>>LISA: That's a
brilliant idea, though.
And this is a great
teaching technique to say,
this is your own country.
You make the rules.
You're safe.
You make the safety of it.
And they even call it-- so
every time they come in,
you've created an
environment of safety.
>>GRAHAM: Exactly.
And we read the
contract every time
we get together, to
remind them, hey,
this is the commitment
we all made.
>>LISA: What types of
things are on the contract?
>>GRAHAM: So we have respect.
We have open mindedness,
trustworthiness, fun, laughter,
integrity.
We have honesty,
and that they're
willing to live authentically--
the time we spend together--
and that they will
try their very best
and they're going to show not
only respect for themselves,
but for each other,
and that we're
going to create a country
that's full of dignity,
where everyone has the
opportunity to really embrace
a sense of self-worth
and self-respect
and a certain level
of elegance, as well.
>>LISA: Nice And dignity.
>>GRAHAM: Dignity, yeah.
>>LISA: Yes.
And so that's day one?
>>GRAHAM: That's day one.
>>LISA: And you don't
even start the writing?
>>GRAHAM: No, not yet.
No.
Actually, day two, then we begin
the writing, with the Who Am I.
And they're asked to contemplate
the question, who am I
underneath my name,
underneath my age,
underneath the color of my skin?
And what is my purpose
for being alive?
So I'm asking them to get
beyond the facts of their lives
as they know it-- to even
get beyond the thoughts they
have about themselves.
Because sometimes the thoughts
we have about ourselves
are not true.
>>LISA: Right.
And they live by their facts.
It's on every single
sheet, paper-- everything.
>>GRAHAM: Exactly.
>>LISA: So you
throw that all away.
What do you start to see?
>>GRAHAM: Oh, man, this is
one of my favorite exercises,
Lisa, because sometimes
a child will write,
I am a young woman
of self worth.
I am more than my pain.
I am more than my circumstances.
I am so much more
than what you see.
And if you give
me a chance, I'll
show you, as I show myself.
And the writings are phenomenal.
>>LISA: And you then publish
some of these in a book.
>>GRAHAM: We publish some
of these writings, yeah.
>>LISA: Which makes
them feel so great.
>>GRAHAM: Absolutely.
Yeah.
>>LISA: Do you tell them upfront
that this is what happens?
>>GRAHAM: Sometimes,
depending on the environment.
But sometimes I'll
say-- because I
don't want the book
to be the hook.
And sometimes they'll
say, well, what
do I get if I do this work?
And I'll say, you
get yourself back.
I don't get a cookie or-- no.
You get yourself.
Isn't that enough?
I mean, we will bring
in treats, but the point
is, I want them to begin to know
that who they are is enough.
And when you've got a
great job, that is enough.
Everything else is
icing on the cake.
But who you are and
that sense of having
accomplished something or
finding your authentic voice--
my goodness, that
is more than enough.
And then later, I'll
tell them, listen,
I want to publish some of these.
So we have release forms.
If they're 18, they can
sign, or family members
or legal guardians
can sign for them.
And when we publish
the books, each child
will get a copy
of the book, which
I'm really, really proud of.
>>LISA: So they can have that
legacy living out in the world,
permanently?
>>GRAHAM: Yes.
Today, Lisa, was so funny.
This one young girl didn't
realize that the book "An Angel
By My Side--" that
my foundation had
compiled it and put it together.
She said, this exercise, it
kind of reminds me of that book.
I've been reading a great book
called "An Angel By My Side."
She went on and on and on.
She goes, it's a great book.
It's really helping me.
Page 67-- she remembered
the page and everything.
And I said, oh, yeah,
I'm familiar with that.
Yeah.
I edited the book and it's
from students of mine.
She goes, you did it?
>>LISA: Oh, my gosh.
That's beautiful synchronicity.
>>GRAHAM: Yeah.
>>LISA: So the book
is called "Voices
of the Unheard," which
is a beautiful title.
>>GRAHAM: Isn't that wonderful?
>>LISA: And you do
volume after volume?
>>GRAHAM: We do.
We also have events that we do
called Voices of the Unheard
where we have some of the
young people that are now
out interpret their own work
as monologues-- soliloquies--
alongside professional
actors and dignitaries.
So Lisa, you may get
a call from me going,
are you available to come
be one of the readers?
>>LISA: I would be honored.
>>GRAHAM: Because Reverend
Michael and his wife Ricki--
>>LISA: Are you kidding?
Yes.
>>GRAHAM: It's a lot of fun.
>>LISA: What a privilege.
>>GRAHAM: It really is.
And for me, too, to
facilitate all of this.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAHAM: And it's incredible.
>>LISA: So let me ask you
about the acting part of it
and the expression part of it.
How do you teach kids who
have never, ever thought
about being an actor or
performing anything on stage?
>>GRAHAM: Well, I just
tell them, just be honest.
Be honest with your feelings.
And it's OK if you cry.
I remember last summer,
I worked with one girl
who's very resistant
because she's not
used to allowing herself to be
vulnerable in front of people.
And she'd written this beautiful
piece about her grandmother.
Oh, my God, it's one of the most
stunning pieces I've ever read.
And I said, if it's OK,
Alejandra, just do it.
And she would fight me
and throw temper tantrums.
But on the day of the
event at the school,
she started to
read her monologue
and then it broke through
and her voice cracked.
And there was not a
dry eye in the audience
because she really spoke
from her heart, dedicated
this piece-- this
beautifully written piece--
to her grandmother.
And it was awesome.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>GRAHAM: Yeah.
>>LISA: And she got
to express that.
Her grandmother
wasn't there, was she?
>>GRAHAM: No, she
wasn't, unfortunately.
But she got to
express it for her
and to feel what that's like.
>>LISA: Well, that's a good
point because you don't need
to be attached to the outcome--
>>GRAHAM: No.
No, you don't.
>>LISA: --in any of this.
>>GRAHAM: That's right.
And in fact, it's
best if you're not,
because I think for so
many of these children,
they've been let down
so much by expectations.
And so just do it.
Enjoy it.
And just let the moment unfold.
Let it--
>>LISA: That is such
a great life lesson,
is to detach from that outcome.
>>GRAHAM: That's right.
>>LISA: We have so
many expectations
put on us and our visions of
how perfect we want it to be.
>>GRAHAM: That's right.
That's right, and how
we think it should be.
I was just telling one of
your associates, Joyce,
that even being on your show--
she had no idea that I just
love you and how much
I wanted to meet you.
She had no idea.
So I said, wow, Joyce, if
we just keep doing our work
and let the magic of life
put the threads together--
>>LISA: It shows
up as a miracle.
>>GRAHAM: It shows
>>LISA: But yet it's
already been pre-designed.
>>GRAHAM: That's right.
That's right.
>>LISA: I know.
I just love that.
>>GRAHAM: Isn't that cool?
Me, too.
>>LISA: We think
we're in charge.
I forget that all the time.
>>GRAHAM: Me, too.
>>LISA: I've recently
gotten better at just
when I can't figure things
out and things change
and I don't get it, I just
keep giving it up and giving
in and going, OK,
this is your plan.
Guide me to the next step.
It's been mapped out.
And I tend to sometimes think
I'm in control and I'm not.
>>GRAHAM: I'm not in
control, at all, of anything.
>>LISA: And the children
that you talk to,
that's got to be one
of the biggest things,
is that they feel
out of control.
>>GRAHAM: They sure do.
They feel out of control.
They're in a lot of pain.
It's hard for them to
trust because the adults
or the people around them
that they've have to trust,
most of them have let them down.
So they're having to learn--
and they've let themselves down.
And so that's the point that I
try to address is I said look,
I'll let you down you.
You'll expect me to
come in maybe one day,
and she's off doing
something and I'm not here.
So that's part of
the human life.
However, even when you
let yourself down, how do
we recover from those things?
That's the difference--
how you recover.
So we need to build
skills and build
new ways of behaving
that can help us better
recover-- that can help us
discern how to make better
choices to take advantage
of opportunities
when they come to us.
One of the things we talked
about today, in fact-- I said,
look, ladies, some of
you wait to like someone
before you do something.
I said, I'm standing here.
You may or may not like me.
It doesn't matter.
Is anything I'm saying
resonating with you
in your heart, where it matters?
If it is, then so be it.
Go for it.
If it's not, I get it.
OK.
No one program is going
to be fine for everybody.
That's why there's
billions of us
and there's billions
of programs.
However, be true to yourself.
And that's what
they have to learn--
how to listen to themselves.
>>LISA: Have you learned a ton?
>>GRAHAM: Oh, yes, Lisa.
Everything that I've been
teaching-- just as my mother
was learning what she
was trying to teach me,
I, too-- that seems to
be the fabric running
throughout our family.
I'm teaching what
I need to learn--
how to have the authentic voice.
Because people will
say to me, well,
how can you relate
to these kids?
You're not involved with drugs
or addictions or anything.
I said, look, my
addiction of choice
was a sense of unworthiness.
I said, that was crippling
for me on certain levels.
You could never tell
by looking at me
because I could
put on a nice smile
and I could be respectful, but
inside, I was in a lot of pain.
And so as the children
become stronger, so do I.
As I'm teaching them to have
a greater sense of self-worth,
I'm teaching myself--
>>LISA: So will you.
>>GRAHAM: So will I.
>>LISA: So you're turning
that worthlessness
into worthiness
through your journey--
through fulfilling your purpose.
>>GRAHAM: Absolutely.
>>LISA: Which is the
whole point that I really
wanted to convey
here, was that you
can discover your own healing
through helping others.
>>GRAHAM: Absolutely.
>>LISA: It's one
of the biggest--
it's the best way
of self-healing.
>>GRAHAM: I think so, too.
>>LISA: I remember Oprah
said that one of the best
ways to self-healing
is to help others.
>>GRAHAM: Absolutely.
There's no other way.
So these children, I'm
so indebted to them.
I just love them.
>>LISA: It's because you say
that that it's successful.
We're going to take a look here
at a clip of the entire program
Spirit Awakening.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
-Spirit Awakening is a program
founded by Akuyoe Graham that
is designed to awaken the
spirit of young people
in the juvenile camps and
at-risk youth, in general.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
-Right now, she's working
in our girls programs.
And she takes these very angry,
depressed acting out kids
and she gives them hope.
-I was fighting 25 years
to life without parole.
And I had just been slowly
going through this process,
writing every day and getting
to know myself on the inside.
The accused, misused, misled.
I'm the mistake, black
sheep, disappointment.
No way.
I am redemption,
determination, a second chance.
I'm here to do right.
Stand free from my
plight and I refuse
to give up without a fight.
I am redeemed.
-So that foundation was
created as a nonprofit--
a charitable arts
organization-- that
would implement creative
writing and life skills
programs to youth-- teenagers.
-I could be free and
still be incarcerated.
So that, in itself, is what
Spirit Awakening means to me.
It's freedom within the bars.
-The work is so important.
You have children who
haven't felt like they're
worth very much put
in a place where
they're made to feel even worse.
And Spirit Awakening comes
in and we show them love.
We show them love
through who they are.
-She approaches everything
via spirituality.
And I think that's key
because Miss Akuyoe shows
them a different side of life.
-There has to be an avenue.
There has to be a way for youth
to engage in a conversation,
even, about spirituality
and who they are.
That has to be offered
to them because if that's
who we are and we negate
that, then essentially,
we're negating ourselves.
So if you go to
a classroom-- you
go to an educational facility
to teach, especially,
youth that are disenfranchised--
youth that have been neglected
and abandoned or
abused-- but you're not
going in with the very heart
and soul of who they are
and who you are, how far
are you really going to get?
-It's a writing program-- a
WRITES of passage-- W-R-I-T-
E-S-- because it helps to evoke
who they are from the inside
out through language--
through words.
-They see their work
published in books
and they see their
name under it.
They get credit for it.
They're featured in a book.
And it's like,
wow, that's my work
that Miss Akuyoe
inspired me to write.
-It begins to
dispel all the myths
about so-called bad children.
And you realize that
it's our responsibility
to develop an environment
where children
are free of pain
and fear and anger.
And that's what this
program begins to do.
It begins to touch on
that-- to free them
of thoughts that
keep them enslaved.
-I'd just like to look
into the camera and say,
if you haven't yet taken a stand
for the children of the world--
if you haven't yet taken a
stand and supported Spirit
Awakening-- the foundation--
this is your opportunity.
It'll make you feel
good about you.
Do it.
-So anyone who sees or is
touched by this program,
I urge them to take
a stand with her
and contribute in
whatever way they
can so that these
programs can go forward
and that lives can transform.
-We're saying, be still.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: This is such a
great analogy for life,
is to take all the
thoughts and the feelings
and the unworthiness that
we feel about ourselves--
and these children have
learned to lay all that aside
because this is their life now.
>>GRAHAM: That's right.
>>LISA: Do you have
children who just buck you
and say, there's no way
I'm going to do this?
>>GRAHAM: Oh, sure.
Sure.
>>LISA: How do you
deal with that?
>>GRAHAM: Well, I had to learn
how not to take it personal,
number one.
It's like, ahh,
they don't like me.
And so that's been a big
learning curve for me, as well.
And now, though, again, what
I do ask of those-- if there's
one or two that do not
want to participate--
I have learned that some
of the kids may say,
I don't want to participate,
but they're listening.
They are still in the classroom
and they are listening.
And sometimes, those
kids, six months later,
they're now my best friend.
And they've done the writings.
They've kept it in a journal.
And they'll say, Miss Akuyoe,
I did all the writings.
I know I never participated,
but here it is.
And still, you do have
some that will say,
no I don't want to do this.
This is not for me.
And I'm like, fine.
As long as you're
not disruptive,
you can do other work that
your teacher will give you,
and we're good.
And so you win
some; you lose some.
But most of them
really do participate.
>>LISA: So you're
part of a curriculum?
>>GRAHAM: I am, which
is really amazing,
because I get to teach this
with a teacher in the classroom.
It's not an after
school program.
Actually, a part of
it's been sanctioned
by LACO-- the Los Angeles
County Office of Education.
That this is one
of the ways they
can enhance the classroom
learning, through the Spirit
Awakening program, as well.
So it's a really big
honor end kudos to LACO
for recognizing that the arts
can be really instrumental.
>>LISA: Huge.
>>GRAHAM: Yeah,
it's really huge.
>>LISA: Yes.
It's been taken out
of school systems that
are outside of the program.
>>GRAHAM: I know.
>>LISA: And that's wonderful.
So within the
educational day, it's
regular math and
science and arts
are a part of the curriculum
every day, or once a week or--
>>GRAHAM: Once a week.
I go in once a week.
And sometimes it's
a twice a week.
>>LISA: A different place?
>>GRAHAM: Yeah.
The program is at the girls
camp in Santa Clarita,
also at Los Padrinos Juvenile
Hall in Downey, and then
Sylmar Juvenile Hall,
which is in Sylmar.
And we've been working at
the Phoenix Academy, as well.
So different places--
different schools.
And it's not just for
incarcerated children.
As one teacher once
said to me, you
don't have to be incarcerated
to have a spiritual awakening.
And I said, I know.
You don't.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Well let me ask you,
how could people--
if they want to be a
part of this program
and they're in a different
part of the country--
have you developed a program
where they could step
into a curriculum and do
this in their own area?
>>GRAHAM: Absolutely.
They can contact us through
the foundation website.
And we have a book-- "The
Little Book Of Transformation--"
which is the first
level of the program.
So they could order
some of those books.
I also do go out to
different places.
And what I really am doing
now that I'm excited about
is I'm able to teach and
do professional development
with teachers or artist
teachers and help them develop
a program for their site
or in their community.
>>LISA: That's brilliant.
So you've made this
bigger than you.
It's not just have to you
going to these places.
>>GRAHAM: No, no.
>>LISA: There's
many learnings here.
So you have made this
available for other people
to go in and teach at
their organizations.
>>GRAHAM: Facilities, yeah.
>>LISA: But they can
take on this curriculum.
Do you guide them through it
or is there a online situation?
>>GRAHAM: The online,
we're working on.
We want to have that up
by the end of the year
so people can just go online
and do this program online.
>>LISA: And so
anywhere in the world,
somebody can take this program
on, bringing arts and writing
and transformation--
>>GRAHAM: That's right.
>>LISA: And it's not any
specific religion that you're--
>>GRAHAM: No, not at all.
You could still practice
your own religion.
The meditation is simply
taking moments of silence.
Who cannot benefit from a
few moments of being still?
>>LISA: Mindfulness.
>>GRAHAM: Mindfulness.
There you go.
>>LISA: How do you teach that?
Now, that's the first
thing you go out with?
>>GRAHAM: That's right.
What's really nice is that
through the contracts that we
create with the students--
they create these guidelines
for this new country
that we're creating.
After they've signed it and
we have one of the students
get up and read it, then we
take our moments of silence.
We go into the silence
where we make a commitment.
So it's mindfulness.
And also, it's a guided
sort of meditation
where I'll invite them, again,
OK, just bring all of yourself
to this moment.
Whatever is
happening in the dorm
or with whomever--
whatever-- be here now.
Let's be present
to this moment now.
Then we take the
moments of silence.
Then we begin our work.
>>LISA: And does that
always start off that way?
>>GRAHAM: No.
Sometimes if I go
into a classroom--
there's something
going on-- I have
to deal with
whatever is going on.
There might be a
fight breaks out
or something happened in
the dorm-- in a classroom.
And when the kids
are hot with anger,
it's hard to say, OK, let's be
quiet and go to the silence.
>>LISA: Sure.
>>GRAHAM: Again, being
mindful-- I have to be mindful.
And so sometimes we might end
the classroom with the silence
or we might do it in
the middle of the class.
But what I have
found is sometimes
the students will say,
if we haven't done it,
can we take the
moments of silence?
I really love it.
I like being quiet.
>>LISA: That's the
opportunity they
get to do that and be safe.
>>GRAHAM: That's right.
And be safe.
>>LISA: Now, some of the
children have gotten out?
>>GRAHAM: Yes.
>>LISA: And you've
befriended these children?
>>GRAHAM: Oh, yeah.
We have a whole mentoring
program, as well.
Because Lisa, it takes
an awful lot of money
to incarcerate someone.
The figures change,
but I estimate,
from the Department
of Justice, that it
takes anywhere between
$30,000 to $70,000 per child.
Can you imagine?
>>LISA: Wow.
Wow.
>>GRAHAM: And so if
we are willing to make
that kind of
investment, we better
be willing to make an
investment when they come out.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAHAM: Because a lot
of times what happens
is that when they come out--
when they're released--
they go right back into
the same environment.
Now, if that environment
is an abusive environment--
so all that work we
just did, and you're
putting them right back there?
Now, how many 16, 17 year olds--
it's hard enough for an adult--
breaking habitual patterns.
But when you're 16
and 17 and then you're
placed back in an environment
where perhaps that is not
supported or your family
members and the people
you're living with now
view you as a threat
because you've changed--
you're not gossiping.
>>LISA: Right.
Who do you think you are?
Yes.
>>GRAHAM: There you go.
Who do you think you are?
You think you're better
than us-- all of that stuff.
And you're 17.
You just want some
peace of mind.
It's like, fine.
Whatever.
I'll do whatever.
And then you get
rearrested because you
broke your probation
and you're back again.
It makes no sense.
So I went to my board
and I said, look,
I want to open group homes.
I want to call
them Spirit House.
>>LISA: Oh, my God.
That is immense.
>>GRAHAM: Isn't that--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>GRAHAM: I mean,
Lisa, can you imagine?
>>LISA: You listen and you do.
You just do.
That's huge.
OK.
Tell us about them.
Sorry.
>>GRAHAM: Well, thank you for
encouraging me with your show.
So I really do listen.
OK.
So Spirit House-- I'm
so stoked about this.
I envision a home-- maybe
six beds or so for the kids
with two adults living there
full time like house moms.
We'll have Spirit
House for girls,
Spirit House for boys, where
they can-- there's a meditation
room-- a room for silence--
where they can continue
these practices that
they're learning.
They can go to school and then
come back and stay for at least
two years-- a minimum of
one year up to two years.
So that by then, they
really have these new skills
under their belt
and they can go out
in the world feeling
a little stronger.
They are more secure about who
they are-- about their voices.
They can go out in
the world and begin
to face the world
that they are in
and live these contributing
lives of purpose
and intentionalities.
And so that's the vision.
That's kind of where
we're at right now.
>>LISA: That's beautiful.
And that's just starting now?
>>GRAHAM: That's
just starting now.
We're in that process.
I'm hoping that by
the end of this year,
we can announce at our year end
event, hey, we've Spirit House.
We got the house.
We're going to open it.
>>LISA: Oh, my God.
That's incredible.
So you do events
every year for--
>>GRAHAM: We do--
Voices of the Unheard.
Every December, we do
And last year, just this past
December, we did it at USC
and we're hoping
to go back there
again this year for
our 20th anniversary.
And before then,
though, in March,
the LA County Adolescence
Social Services
has asked us to do an encore.
So we're doing it March 20th at
LATC-- Voices of the Unheard.
>>LISA: That's great.
>>GRAHAM: Isn't that great?
>>LISA: You've been doing
this for 20 years now?
>>GRAHAM: Yeah.
>>LISA: That's amazing.
You speak of it as
if you just started.
>>GRAHAM: I know.
Isn't that amazing.
>>LISA: That's beautiful.
>>GRAHAM: I'm still so
excited by the work.
>>LISA: Exactly.
So then you took a trip that--
>>GRAHAM: Yeah.
>>LISA: So tell me about
the trip to your homeland.
>>GRAHAM: Yes.
We went back to Ghana.
And that was another a dream
I had, where-- I remember,
Lisa-- next time
I see you-- I have
this picture in my
garage of me standing
on the sandy beach of Ghana,
my hands outstretched,
and I called it Tribal Oasis.
And I had, again, this vision
of taking youth to Ghana.
And when I stood there and took
that picture-- I don't know.
Maybe 10 years
ago-- I had no idea
how it would all come together.
But it came together.
Can you believe it?
So I was able to take-- we
did our first trip in 2012.
I had two or three teachers
with me and a probation officer.
We took four young
people that were just
out of incarceration--
three of them.
One had never been incarcerated.
But they were my mentors.
I said, let's go
and check it out
and see if this can really work.
And it did.
And then this past year, the
California Wellness Foundation
sponsored us.
They're an amazing
organization-- one
of our big sponsors.
They sponsored us to
take about-- there
were 15 of us that
went to Ghana.
It was amazing.
>>LISA: What did
you discover or what
did the children discover there?
>>GRAHAM: They discovered
a greater voice.
They discovered their
passion for living.
They discovered
just how fortunate
they are-- that they have
a lot going for them here
in this country.
Because back in
Ghana, they got to see
kids that don't have
half what they have.
So a lot of them said, what
am I complaining about?
I have so much.
Let me get down and do my work.
I know the first trip, a lot of
them came back-- they're like,
oh, I'm in school.
I'm working.
Why am I complaining?
All I do is complain
and I have so much.
So it was really great for
them-- for me to watch them
as they began to see all
that they've been given
and that because of
what they've been given,
they can do so much more.
>>LISA: What do you do
there when you get there?
>>GRAHAM: Oh, boy.
It's a historical trip.
We go to the slave castle and we
do a releasing ceremony there,
just releasing whatever
is in any of us--
those places where we're wounded
that would make us go out
and wound others.
So let's heal those wounds
within ourselves first.
So we do a beautiful
ceremony at the slave castle.
And then we continue
our writing practices.
We go hiking and swimming.
We also go there
to be of service.
So we took gifts--
toys and clothes--
>>LISA: Clothes.
Yes, yes.
>>GRAHAM: --for the orphans.
We went to the Osu
Children's Orphanage,
which is one of Ghana's--
in the capital Accra,
one of the biggest
orphanages there.
And we went and we
visited the kids.
We sponsored a
luncheon for them.
My mom is there, so we went.
And she actually sponsored a
great deal of the luncheon.
And we hired cooks and chefs.
They made the food.
We went.
We fed all 300
kids and the staff
and then gave them the toys.
It was incredible.
>>LISA: Oh, my goodness.
Let's take a look at the journey
that Akuyoe went on to Ghana
with her four friends.
Take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-On this episode of
"First Time Africa,"
we follow a group of students
as they accompany their teacher
back to her native
land of Ghana.
-This idea to take this trip
came from students of mine.
They wanted to see Africa.
And I asked them-- I said,
is it because I'm from Ghana?
They said no, they've always
been fascinated with Africa.
And they spoke about going
to Africa on a service trip
to visit an
orphanage or a school
to bring some supplies to
the orphanage or the school.
I said, I don't know how
we're going to do this,
but I'm going to say yes.
-I'm Jonni Encantra.
And I'm from Los
Angeles, California.
I'm 18 years old.
I used to know most
of the countries
in Africa-- like in sixth
grade, for geography class.
I know the Sahara
desert's on top,
and then down at the
bottom is all green.
-Hi.
My name is Quiyona Bridges.
I'm 19 years old.
I'm from Compton, California.
So now we're going
out of the country.
We had to get
passports, the visas.
I'm so excited.
-My name is Christine
Alegre and I'm
from West Covina, California.
What I know about Africa is
just that it's the motherland.
It's the origin of everything.
And what I know about
Ghana, specifically,
is just that
Akuyoe's from there.
And if she is, then
the people must
be beautiful and wonderful.
-Jeffrina Oaks.
I'm 21 years old.
And I'm originally from
Paterson, New Jersey.
This is my first time out of
the country, so this is amazing.
And for it to be Africa the
first time is like, woo.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
-If you have a dream or
something you want to achieve,
say yes to it first.
Jeffrina, Jonni,
Christine, Quiyona-- they
all say yes right away.
-My dream pretty much
all connected in one
is to be able to creatively
express myself and make
a lot of money doing it.
And that could be writing,
singing, acting, dancing,
audio engineering,
mothering-- just
to be able to express
what's inside of me.
-I do want to pursue writing.
It's not about money or about
being successful with it.
More than anything, it's just
about being happy and using
that because it makes me happy.
-I want to be a
teacher and I want
to start my own
foundation later.
So this is another reason why
Akuyoe included me on the trip.
She's taking me to
see how it is or see
how it would be to bring
your own foundation.
-I have a variety
of interests, but I
want to stick to nonprofits.
I want to study business
because money and people really
click with me.
-I emailed everybody
the itinerary, OK?
So you all have
it on your emails.
Here's the camera.
And I'm going to
give that to-- who?
To Jeffrina?
-Jeffrina, yeah.
-Oh, God.
All the responsibility.
-Do not lose-- yes.
Do not lose this camera.
-[INAUDIBLE]
-All right.
Get out of here.
Goodbye.
I love you.
-OK.
Bye.
-Bye.
-Is it recording?
It says Record.
That means it's
recording, right?
This is what happens when you're
getting ready to go to Africa.
[LAUGHS]
-Me and Frinna, during
the packing the night
before the trip, we were just in
a twilight zone at that moment,
because we wanted to travel,
but we couldn't picture it.
It wasn't real until
that moment that we
were packing for the trip.
-We are done.
-Good morning.
-I think that our
group is diverse enough
and strong enough and everyone
will have their experience.
I'm confident that
it will be, whatever
it is-- love it, like it,
hate it-- it'll be powerful.
-These are clothes
for Christine brought
to donate to the orphans.
-Hopefully they're excited.
I'm excited for them.
-Yeah, I hope they like it.
-All right.
Jonni, Kerry, cut that out.
[LAUGHTER]
Knock it off.
-I haven't seen you
for a long time.
-There was just
excitement-- pure excitement
that this was finally happening.
Because this been a
dream and a vision
that I'd held for many years.
So I was just like, oh my God,
we're really going to Ghana.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
-Thanks for flying with us.
-Thank you.
Woo.
This is neat.
It's hot out here.
We are just arriving to Africa.
-I am so hot.
-Right.
-When we first arrived,
I got off the airplane,
and it was like
a whoosh of heat.
-I felt weird because I had
to go in the immigrant line.
Now the table's turned.
-As always, when you come
out of the plan in Accra,
at the airport, you're hit
with the humidity and the heat.
It's like, oh, yeah,
we're in Africa.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: So that was just
the beginning, we saw,
of your journey.
And so how often do you do this?
>>GRAHAM: Every other year.
>>LISA: Every other year?
>>GRAHAM: Yeah.
>>LISA: And how do you
choose who to bring?
>>GRAHAM: It's actually
self-selecting,
because they have to
have been of service.
Twice a month, as part
of the mentoring program,
we go and volunteer.
So we look to see which
young people had been doing
a volunteering work,
which one of them
have been coming to meetings,
and where they're at,
to see if they're mature enough.
Because what I tell
them is, you're
ambassadors for
the United States
when you go out of the country.
You are representing
not only yourself,
but you're representing
your country.
So you've got to represent.
So it's like, are
you ready for that?
Are you ready to
be an ambassador
for your own country?
And when you frame
it that way, it's
really very self-selecting.
And we watch to see-- me and
my other artist facilitators,
we look to see which ones
are always giving excuses.
I couldn't come to the
meeting because [MUMBLING].
>>LISA: Right.
So they have to have
pre-qualifications and stick
with it for a long
period of time?
>>GRAHAM: Yes.
For a period of time.
>>LISA: And that's
self-selecting.
That's interesting.
>>GRAHAM: Very much so.
>>LISA: How do you keep up
your spiritual practice?
You do so much for others.
And I see that it gives
back to you so much.
>>GRAHAM: Oh, yeah.
Oh, yeah.
>>LISA: But what
is your practice?
>>GRAHAM: I meditate.
I make sure that I feed
myself with great food,
like listening to "The
Aware Show" with Lisa Garr.
>>LISA: You learn a lot, yes.
>>GRAHAM: Yes.
And I'm very serious about that.
I mean, your show--
it's OK, it's
Wednesday and Thursday, 1:00.
Of course, Doctor
Beckwith-- Reverend Michael
is one of my mentors
and teachers.
So I go to Agappe.
And I try to do what
I teach the children
and make sure I get massages
and eat well and hike and do
all things that I enjoy
that I give to them.
>>LISA: Do you ever get
depressed or challenged?
>>GRAHAM: Challenged, yes.
I don't think I
really get depressed.
>>LISA: I don't think so either.
[LAUGHTER]
>>GRAHAM: But
challenged, oh, yes.
And frustrated sometimes,
if it's like, oh,
this isn't working out the way
I think it should or whatever.
>>LISA: Because most people
would use the excuse of,
the system-- the system-- I
can't penetrate the system.
You have.
>>GRAHAM: Oh, yeah.
>>LISA: Do you ever get
frustrated or blocks there?
>>GRAHAM: Oh, sure.
I mean, because not everyone
is gung ho about this program.
Although I will say--
I will say that I've
been doing this for a long time.
And probation
officers and teachers
will tell you they're used
to all kinds of people coming
in promising the
world or whatever.
And at least they
know I'm consistent.
>>LISA: You have a
good track record.
>>GRAHAM: Yeah.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>GRAHAM: And it speaks for
itself because at these sites,
administration changes
every two years or so.
So it's not like there's
one particular principal who
just loves me personally
and keeps bringing me in.
Every two or three
years, there's
a different administration--
different teachers
that I have to be vetted by.
But you know what keeps
us in the facilities?
>>LISA: What?
>>GRAHAM: The children.
>>LISA: Oh, they say how
much they-- and they change
and they respond.
>>GRAHAM: Yeah.
It's the children.
We've had students that have
done-- they write letters.
They've written to the
Department of Justice.
They write letters to probation
officer saying, please
bring this program back.
I bring students that have
been through our program
back to the facilities to
meet the other children.
One of them is one of my
assistants, Quiyona Bridges,
who-- at some point, I'm
sure you'll meet her,
Lisa-- beautiful young woman.
I met her when she was 14.
She now works for the
Spirit Waking Foundation.
>>LISA: Oh, my God.
>>GRAHAM: Some of them
work with us so they can--
>>LISA: To have her
go back in and talk
with those children has
got to be so powerful.
>>GRAHAM: Very powerful,
because now they're
not just hearing it from me.
And she can say, look,
I went from point A
to point B. I was once
where you're sitting,
right there, with my attitude.
I was an angry child.
And it's true, because if anyone
had told me that this young--
she's now this elegant
young woman with dignity.
And if they'd told me that
she would be working with me,
I would have said, oh, no.
With that attitude?
Back then, I would've
been like, no, no, no.
I don't think so.
But here she is, a
beautiful young woman
that teaches me all the time.
>>LISA: It doesn't
necessarily even
have to be, oh, I had
this vision as a child
that I was going
to be doing this.
She came from a totally
different set of circumstances.
>>GRAHAM: That's right.
>>LISA: And you can change.
Absolutely.
>>LISA: And that's
a huge message.
How old is she now?
>>GRAHAM: She's 22.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>GRAHAM: Yeah.
22.
And she has a daughter--
beautiful child.
So yeah, we call her the
little Spirit Awakening.
>>LISA: So what
is up for you now?
I mean, you've done
so much and you're
going so many different places.
>>GRAHAM: I know.
Actually, celebrating
our 20th year,
we have sort of some
major milestones
we want to hit--
the Spirit House,
really making sure that the
mentoring program is online,
and then making the film out of
the play-- "Spirit Awakening."
I've written the
screenplay and it's--
>>LISA: Oh, great.
>>GRAHAM: Yeah.
And one of my other
mentors in the business
is the producer Robert
Chartoff, who is a love.
He did all the Rocky movies.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>GRAHAM: And so
he's mentoring me
in terms of bringing this
story to the big screen.
>>LISA: Beautiful.
>>GRAHAM: So those
are the main things.
>>LISA: Can't wait to see it.
Sounds exciting.
You're up to so many things.
You've taught us so much and
just explaining your life
about overcoming adversity,
about meeting new challenges,
about taking action, about truly
authentically being who you are
and healing herself
through helping others.
Just amazing.
And thank you so
much for being here.
>>GRAHAM: Lisa,
thank you very much.
What an honor and a privilege.
And again, I love you, Lisa.
>>LISA: Aw, you're kidding.
The honor is mine.
>>GRAHAM: Thank you so much.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
If you would like to watch
a replay of my interview
with Akuyoe, you could
go to gaiamtv.com
and you could share
it with your friends.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]